From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> As Democrats wrestle over the direction
of their party, a new crop of
progressive [music] candidates has made
the case that the political future is
economic populism.
Among the biggest supporters of that
platform are college graduates who used
to lean right politically, but over the
last few decades [music] have moved
increasingly to the left.
Today, my colleague Noam Scheiber
explains the economic forces that have
left many college grads deeply indebted,
[music]
underpaid, and angry, and how their
unmet expectations are reshaping class
politics [music]
in America.
>> [music]
>> It's Thursday, [music]
June 11th.
Noam, to set the stakes of the
conversation that we're about to have,
can you describe the political
transformation of college graduates that
you've just written a book about and
that you've been reporting on for years
now?
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah, so I think we sometimes forget
that as recently as the 1980s and 1990s,
college grads were actually pretty
conservative politically. In the 1980s,
for example, they tended to vote
Republican by double-digit margins, at
least on the presidential level. They
used to favor things like smaller
government, lower taxes, fewer
regulations, and a lot of this I think
was driven by the fact that
college-educated workers tended to see
themselves as kind of
management-adjacent.
They tended to expect that their lives
would become much more affluent in the
future. So, this is very consistent with
their worldview. If you're an affluent
person and you run a business or you're
an executive, you tend to want the
government to stay out of your way. But,
if you fast forward a few decades, you
really start to get a different picture.
And if you look at the most recent
election, you see that college grads
actually shift really far in the other
direction. They end up supporting Kamala
Harris over Donald Trump by about a
15-point margin. And on the specific
economic like government and taxes and
regulation, they've actually moved much
further to the left, much closer to
people without a degree than they were
in the 1980s.
>> And so, what explains that? What is
driving that transformation?
>> Well, there are a number of factors that
people point to when trying to explain
this. But, in my book, I focus first and
foremost on economics. A lot of people
who went to college were really sold on
this idea that it would be the key to an
upper-middle-class adulthood. And it
turned out that the reality fell far,
far short of that. And instead, they
were squeezed in a whole variety of
ways. And that fueled a sense of
grievance and frustration among a lot of
college grads with the economic system
that exists today.
>> Okay, what are the economic forces that
led to this deep sense of frustration?
>> So, this starts several decades ago. In
1970, only about 10% of Americans had
four-year college degrees. The vast
majority of Americans did not go to
college, did not have a degree. But, we
see that in the '80s and '90s, the
number of people going to college really
starts to explode.
>> NBC News in depth tonight, America's new
insecurity. Good jobs, good wages, a
whole way of life disappearing forever.
>> And I think a lot of it has to do with
the decline of traditional blue-collar
jobs.
>> In the first 6 months of this year
alone, America lost 221,000
jobs in manufacturing, and it's getting
worse.
>> There was a sense that automation and
globalization and the decline of unions
was really making it harder for people
to make a living if they only had a high
school degree.
>> Earlier this year, the Census Bureau
reinforced the view that a college
degree makes a big difference in
lifetime earnings, hundreds of thousands
of dollars difference.
>> And the solution in a lot of cases was,
well, we should send them to college.
>> I have something to say to every family
listening to us tonight.
Your children can go on to college.
>> This really becomes a kind of national
obsession.
>> We can make college as universal in the
21st century as high school is today,
and my
>> Presidents beginning, especially with
Bill Clinton, talk about how people
should go to college so that they can
compete in the modern global economy.
>> The No Child Left Behind Act needs to be
reauthorized and strengthened.
>> We see George W. Bush when [music] he
pushes his education reform initiative,
No Child Left Behind.
>> And the reason I bring it up is in order
to make sure we've got more children
ready for college.
>> emphasizes that we need to prepare
people better to go to college.
>> A good education is no longer just a
pathway to opportunity, it is a
prerequisite.
>> And of course Barack Obama really
elevates this as well.
>> We will provide the support necessary
for all young Americans to complete
college and meet a new goal.
By 2020, America will once again have
the highest proportion of college
graduates in the world.
That is a goal we can meet.
That's a goal we can meet.
>> And this change really happens even
outside of the political realm, too.
Even in [snorts] the public school
system and charter schools, we really as
a nation start emphasizing the
importance [music] of going to college.
>> Good morning, Miss No
Twani. [music]
>> What we're doing here at KIPP Academy
Elementary is preparing our kids not
only for [music] academic excellence,
but for college.
>> One of the largest charter school
networks in the country called KIPP.
[music]
>> Even though they are four and five years
old right now and in kindergarten,
they'll be graduating from college in
the year 2000.
>> Really starts emphasizing in the early
90s that college begins in kindergarten,
that everyone must start obsessing about
college from the very moment that they
enter a classroom.
>> [music]
>> And go to college. Go to college. Go to
college.
>> Hey, don't clap.
>> What you're saying is there's
essentially a national PR campaign for
college.
>> No question. Everyone from your friends
and family members to the president of
the United States is telling you that
this is an absolute necessity. And so
naturally, people start to follow that
advice. And by 2010, we see that 30% of
Americans have four-year college degrees
and it's rising rapidly.
>> 30%, which is compared to what? You said
10% 1970. So basically, the rate tripled
in 40 years.
>> Yeah. And to meet all that demand, we
start to see a whole bunch of new
players open their doors or expand their
ranks. So we see for-profit colleges
really start to enter the scene and we
have a huge increase in the number of
people who are attending for-profit
universities. And another thing that we
see is what are known as non-competitive
public [snorts] universities. So that's
like not the University of Texas at
Austin, which is obviously a very
prestigious public university.
>> How come?
>> Or even the University of Texas at
Dallas, which is a pretty competitive
state university, but something like the
University of Texas at Rio Grande
Valley, which admits almost everyone who
applies to the university. And what
we've seen is that if you go to the
University of Texas at Austin, you tend
to do very well. If you go to the
University of Texas at Dallas, often it
works out pretty well. But, for someone
who graduates from an essentially open
admission public university, it's a much
more complicated picture, and it's not
at all clear that the cost is worth the
benefit to you at a university like
that.
>> Just to summarize quickly, you have this
huge increase in the number of
prospective students, and as a result,
the landscape of education starts to
change in order to accommodate them. You
get these new colleges, both for-profit
and these non-competitive ones, and it
sounds like those changes, they start to
dilute the value of a college degree.
>> That's exactly right. I mean, in some
ways, in the 1980s and 1990s, a college
degree really was a can't-lose asset. We
find that the value of these degrees
were increasing pretty much in lockstep.
Obviously, if you went to Harvard and
studied engineering, you might do better
than someone who went to their state
university and studied art history, but
in general, this was a appreciating
asset. But, [snorts] by the 2000-2010s,
we see a much more mixed picture, which
in some cases makes sense for people,
but in a lot of other cases doesn't make
that much sense for people.
>> I rise today to give my heartfelt
support for the higher education
amendments of 1991.
>> And what's happening around the same
time
>> The provisions of this bill vastly
expand the amount students may borrow to
help them finance their education.
>> is that Congress is making it easier for
people to borrow to go to college. So,
Congress raises the limit on student
debt in the early '90s, and then it
raises it again a few times in the kind
of 2007-2009
period.
>> By passing this bill, we will make a
college education possible for hundreds
of thousands of additional students over
the next 5 years.
>> And this coincides with a really rapid
increase in the debt that people are
taking on to go to college. We see it
roughly double between the early '90s
and 2020.
>> Which is significant, right? Twice the
amount of debt is no small matter.
>> It's no small matter and actually we see
that when people max out on their own
debt, their parents even step in to pick
up the difference. So, it's even larger
than that doubling in some respects.
>> Overall, this sounds like a pretty bad
situation. You have a generation of
people who are being told that college
is absolutely necessary, being hyped up
on the importance of it, who then go to
colleges that may not have even existed
for very long, and then graduating from
those schools with loads of debt. And
that is how they enter the job market.
>> That's right. And then the whole thing
kind of falls apart around 2008.
>> [music]
>> The Great Recession and financial crisis
hits during this time. Many of people
lose their jobs or have trouble finding
work.
>> Right.
>> But in a way, this is kind of a uniquely
sharp blow to these young college grads.
>> Why?
>> Well, because remember, these were the
folks who were probably given the
hardest sell about why they need to go
to college of any generation in history.
They had these sky-high expectations.
They really thought of college as
something that you should pretty much do
everything you can to attain. And yet,
when they leave college and they enter
the job market with this huge amount of
debt, suddenly they're scrambling to
find jobs that are in line with what
they've studied. We see the unemployment
rate for recent college grads jump to
its highest level in decades. And if you
recall what's going on in 2008 and 2009,
debt is just this huge problem. We have
whole financial institutions that are
collapsing under the weight of it.
>> The House passes a sprawling $700
billion government rescue of the
financial industry.
>> And what happens is that the government
intervenes very aggressively to bail out
these large financial institutions.
>> Bailing out Wall Street is the only way
to save Main Street, so says the
president.
>> But for the people who went to college
and who did everything that they thought
they were supposed to do and are stuck
with this debt that's suddenly weighing
them down.
>> You know, for us private citizens,
nobody's bailing us out, nobody's
helping us.
>> There doesn't appear to be a bailout for
them.
>> Right, this moment amplifies this sense
that there are just two tiers of society
in America. There's Wall Street, there's
the ultra-wealthy,
and everyone [snorts] else. You're
pointing to a moment in this history
where the economic forces we've been
discussing start to have very visible
political consequences.
>> Yeah, this is a moment where the country
really shifts in a kind of populist
direction.
On the right, you had the rise of the
Tea Party movement, people who saw the
government intervene and bail out the
big banks, and really start to turn
against government. And then on the
left, you have this sense that the
government is bailing out the fat cats
and the Wall Street billionaires are
doing great, but the rest of the country
is really struggling and the government
isn't doing much for them.
And this really starts to crest with the
Occupy Wall Street movement in 2011.
This was a group of folks who start to
protest in Zuccotti Park in New York
City.
>> Right.
>> After 30 years of having our living
standards decrease while the wealthiest
1% have had it better than ever, I think
it's time for maybe, I don't know, some
participation in our democracy.
>> They really start to identify the 1% as
the kind of bêtes noires of the country,
and it's the other 99% of Americans who
are doing the right thing but getting
left behind by the economy.
>> You know, I went to school a lot of
these people went to school and now that
we're out for the summer or out
completely, there's no jobs. We can't
pay those student loans back and all we
keep hearing from the creditors is we're
lazy.
>> And it turns out that young college
grads are a huge part of this movement.
There have been studies showing that
about three quarters [music]
of the people involved in Occupy were
college grads.
>> Why are other people getting bailed out
and I'm stuck with college loans? Why
can't I get a job that's actually
fulfilling that I like to do?
>> And they actually end up elevating
student debt and student loans as a
major concern of the Occupy movement.
And this is a moment where you start to
hear a whole variety of populist chance
that are probably familiar to a lot of
people.
There's just a whole new vocabulary that
we hadn't really seen when it came to
economic issues before.
>> Yeah, I graduated college in 2011 and
remember Occupy so well. It was this
thing that really activated college
graduates politically, not just in New
York, but all across the country. There
were Occupy-style protests I remember in
many cities and it felt as though this
was the critical juncture at which the
rage that had been bubbling over
inequality, it became more of a
solidified political identity.
>> I think that's right. I think this is a
moment where you have a real shift in
their consciousness. So, instead of
seeing themselves as the people who were
either at the top or who were going to
be at the top pretty soon, they start to
identify with everyone else. They start
to identify with people who have been
exploited by the people at the top.
And of course, the Occupy movement
eventually it out. People leave Zuccotti
Park and they go back to their homes and
their jobs. But this turns out to be the
opening act of a pretty dramatic shift
that will play out across the next 15
years. It's the beginning of this
realignment in American politics that
really changes the way people who went
to college thought about where their
allegiances lie.
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> So Noam, you said the Occupy movement
was really the opening act for this
political realignment. So what happens
after Occupy, after it fizzles out in
2011?
>> So when it comes to the economy, things
really did stay bad for a really long
time, all the way through the end of the
decade. Employment rates for young
college grads are still pretty low.
Wages never really recover. We have this
thing called scarring, which shows that
if you graduate into a recession, your
earnings can be impacted for 10-15 years
later. And then there's this other big
force that's happening out there in the
job market that's really reinforcing all
the things that young college grads are
experiencing. And that's the
consolidation across a whole bunch of
different industries, in tech, in
retail, healthcare. We're seeing
companies get bigger and bigger.
>> Can you just slow down and explain what
you mean by consolidation?
>> Yeah, so in a lot of cases you see
companies merging together. One company
buys another company that it competes
with in some way.
If you think back to the early 2010s,
for example, you have Facebook buying
Instagram or WhatsApp. And maybe that
could be a good thing for consumers,
maybe Facebook invests a lot of money in
building out infrastructure and new
features that consumers really like. But
for workers, that can really reduce the
options that you have about where to
work. And it can actually also be really
frustrating and alienating. Like if you
think of a computer programmer, maybe
they were at a smaller startup and they
felt like they had a real impact on the
development of the product or even a
role in the mission of the company. But
then suddenly they're working for this
giant company. It's much more
bureaucratic. It makes people feel like
they just have a lot less agency in what
they're doing.
>> You're saying consolidation sometimes
leaves workers worse off because as a
worker, you now have fewer options and
less power.
>> That's right. And one of the best places
to see this is actually the healthcare
industry where consolidation really
starts to ramp up in the 2010s.
>> Why? What what happened?
>> Well, the healthcare industry had been
consolidating for a few decades. But if
you remember one of the big priorities
of the Obama administration when it came
to power in 2009, was to make the
healthcare industry a lot more
efficient. And they did that through big
initiatives like Obamacare and through a
series of regulations that really
accelerated consolidation in the
industry.
>> Hmm.
>> And there's actually kind of an irony
here because on one level, Obamacare was
a more populist economic policy. It
really expands healthcare coverage to
millions of Americans who didn't have
it. But on the other hand, it kind of
makes healthcare an industry that's
worse for the people who are working in
it.
>> How do you mean?
>> Well, one of the wrinkles of Obamacare
and these regulations is that they
actually foist more risk onto individual
hospitals and healthcare systems. So for
example, if patients got a procedure and
didn't do that well after the procedure,
the government might not reimburse the
hospitals as much as they were
expecting. And so the hospitals decide
that the way to protect themselves
against this risk is to get bigger and
bigger. You know, if you're a small
hospital and suddenly the administration
isn't reimbursing you as much as you
thought for different procedures because
your patients aren't doing as well as
you'd hoped, that can really hurt you
financially. But, if you operate dozens
and dozens of hospitals, you're much
more insulated against that risk.
>> Mhm. Makes sense.
>> And what happened when these health care
systems got really big is they started
buying up more and more hospitals in
different cities and states. And that
actually created fewer places for people
to work. And this kind of had two
effects. First, if you are a nurse or a
pharmacist or someone who worked in the
back office of a hospital, that really
could have an impact on your wages
because you had fewer potential
employers bidding up the price of your
labor.
>> Right.
>> And then there was a second [snorts] set
of employees like doctors. And these
folks generally didn't see their wages
go down, but they were still affected in
other ways that made them really hate
this new arrangement of working for
bigger and bigger health care systems.
So, for example, I first covered a group
of who were unionizing at a big health
care system in Oregon in 2015. And one
thing that I heard from them over and
over again is, "We feel like cogs in
some giant medical industrial complex.
We might as well be factory workers.
They're governed by MBAs and bean
counters who are suddenly telling them
how much time they can spend with their
patients, how long they can keep
patients in the hospital, what they have
to ask them when they talk to them." And
these are people who have often trained
for years and years.
>> Right.
>> The thing that they pride themselves on
is their professional judgment, the
ability to evaluate a situation, to
apply the best treatment, and suddenly
they feel like they're being
micromanaged by people who have no
medical expertise to speak of. So, it's
incredibly alienating.
>> Yeah, I mean, it sounds like you
basically have the most educated people
in society, almost, doctors, starting to
feel more like laborers. They don't have
that control, they don't have the
stature that they thought they were
getting when they got that MD.
>> Yeah. And what you start to see is that
a lot of highly trained white-collar
workers who at one point had thought of
themselves as management-adjacent, they
start to in a lot of cases identify as
just kind of rank and file employees who
were bossed around by management.
>> Mhm.
>> And then
>> Today,
I am proud to announce my candidacy for
president of the United States of
America.
>> It's at this point in 2016 that all
these grievances start to coalesce into
a mainstream political figure. And that
figure, at least on the left, is Bernie
Sanders.
>> The issue of wealth and income
inequality
is the great moral issue of our time. It
is the great economic issue of our time.
It is the great political issue of our
time. And we will address it.
>> Sanders, the independent senator from
Vermont, comes along and sort of enters
the stage talking about the 99% versus
the 1% and how the bosses and the
billionaires are dominating the
political system in ways that are not
aligned with the interests of ordinary
workers.
>> It is insane. It is counterproductive
to the best interest of our country that
hundreds of thousands of bright young
people cannot afford to go to college
and that millions of others leave school
with a mountain of debt that burdens
them for decades. [cheering]
>> And in ways that might not have been
imaginable a few decades earlier, a lot
of college grads, and especially younger
college grads, really start to identify
with that language.
>> So, the rise of Bernie Sanders and his
political appeal within this class of
highly educated people that you've been
looking at, that is a manifestation of
the shift that you've been talking
about. It seems as though Bernie both
reflects this growing left-wing populism
among college grads, but he also may be
driving it, just like Occupy did,
helping to solidify that identity.
>> I think that's right. Of course, we all
know that Hillary Clinton goes on to win
the Democratic presidential nomination,
but you see Sanders really outperform
with young people and especially with
young college graduates. Overall, he
loses to Hillary Clinton by a small
margin among college grads, but among
young college grads, college grads under
30, he crushes her by a two-to-one
margin. And more broadly, what you see
Sanders doing is really giving voice to
the sense of grievance on the national
political stage. This sense that the
economy just isn't working for them.
>> We have
no choice but to liberate working people
from economic marginalization
and make sure that every person in this
country gets a living wage and health
care as a right.
>> It's not too long after Bernie that we
see Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez win a
congressional seat in New York City.
>> Yep.
>> And it was literally easier for me to
become the youngest woman in American
history elected to Congress than it is
to pay off my student loan debt.
>> And she's very much of this demographic
and supported by this demographic.
>> The red socialist flag is held proudly
as the Democratic Socialists of America
or DSA are going door-to-door for
>> a huge increase in the number of young
college grads who are joining the
Democratic Socialists of America, which
goes from about 5,000 members in the
United States before 2016 to nearly
100,000 members by the end of the
decade, a majority of them young college
educated people.
>> We didn't grow up sort of with the red
scare, um and so the word doesn't scare
us as much.
Um
>> We see support for socialism really rise
among college-educated folks, and
especially young college-educated folks,
basically doubling support between 2010
and 2020, from about 20% to about 40%.
And of course, last year in New York
City,
>> For as long as we can remember,
the working people of New York have been
told by the wealthy and the
well-connected that power does not
belong in their hands.
>> We saw Zohran Mamdani run away with the
mayor's race with a huge burst of
support from young college grads. If you
look at college grads under 30 in New
York City, 84% of them supported Zohran
Mamdani.
>> I am young, despite my best efforts to
grow older.
I am Muslim.
I am A DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST. AND MOST
DAMNING OF ALL, I refuse to apologize
for any of this.
>> And so what we really see is the long
tail of all this economic upheaval that
college grads have been dealing with for
decades come to fruition at this moment
and create all this momentum behind
candidates and ideas that would have
almost been unthinkable before the
financial crisis and great recession.
>> [music]
>> Okay, now at the beginning of this
conversation, you said economic forces
weren't the only thing driving this
populism on the left among this cohort.
So, can we turn to some of the other
forces for a minute? Ideological,
cultural. One theory that I've seen,
which I know you've also engaged with,
for why America's college-educated
population has moved to the left is that
the demographics of this group have just
fundamentally changed. This is an
argument that Eric Levitz of Vox made in
his review of your book. He says,
"Increasingly, the population of college
grads is more female and less white. And
because women and non-white voters tend
to be more progressive in their views,
that's why we're seeing this leftward
shift."
What do you make of that argument?
>> [snorts]
>> There's definitely something to this.
We've seen more women and more people of
color get college degrees, and we know
historically they tend to be more
liberal than white people and men. But,
actually, if you only look at white male
college grads during this period, you
also see them move pretty sharply to the
left, too. So, it's not just a matter of
the changing demographics. The same
profile of person is actually moving to
the left.
>> So, given that, is it possible that it's
the college education itself that's
helping drive students to the left? We
know that colleges as institutions have
been moving to the left in recent years.
It seems plausible that has an effect on
how students' political identities are
shaped.
>> I think that's a really fair point. We
know from a lot of data, including a
recent report by Yale University, that
the ideological composition of faculty
members has really shifted over the past
generation or two. So, in the late '80s,
less than half of faculty members
identified as liberal, and a generation
later, in the mid-2010s, it was well
over half, around 60%. And if you look
at the partisan composition, these days
Democrats tend to outnumber Republicans
among college faculty members by about
10 to 1, which is an incredibly stark
difference.
>> Yeah, wow.
>> I think there's there's something going
on there. It's probably not the whole
story, though.
>> Okay, got it. I There's another thing
that I've been thinking about, Noam,
which is couldn't college graduates be
moving to the left on economic issues,
not actually purely because of their
economic circumstances, but rather
because they're identifying with the
left on a range of issues that really
matter to them. Things like abortion or
race politics. And then once they're in
that tribe, they're also adopting the
economic platform.
>> I do think there's some truth to that.
If you look at research on when college
grads started moving to the left, it
does start to happen around 2004, a few
years before the Great Recession. But
you actually see a much, much sharper
movement to the left after the Great
Recession. So I think the most intuitive
reading of the research is that there
was some kind of cultural politics that
was pushing college grads to the left,
but that the real shift happens after
the bottom falls out of the economy in
2008. It's just hard to overstate how
destabilizing the Great Recession was
for American politics.
>> It's also just worth acknowledging that
even if a college grad may feel more
like the working class economically
speaking, they aren't ironically voting
more like working class people who
didn't go to college in America because
those people have actually moved to the
right. Most of them voted for Trump in
the past three presidential elections.
Of course, in those elections Democrats
didn't put forward an economic populist
to contend with Trump. But when faced
with the options they had,
the working class chose the Republican
in the race.
>> It is absolutely the case that since
about 2012, we've seen this so-called
diploma divide open up where college
grads tend to vote for the Democrat and
people without a degree tend to vote for
the Republican. That gap has gotten
larger since then.
>> Mhm.
>> But one thing that you have to keep in
mind is that actually on economic
issues, on whether you want to tax the
rich or whether you support unions or if
you think the government should have a
big role in healthcare or in regulating
other industries. People who graduated
from college and people who didn't have
actually been moving closer and closer
together over the past 20 years. What we
really see is that these elections just
haven't been fought on those issues.
They've largely been fought on cultural
issues, issues like diversity or LGBTQ
rights or immigration and race. And on
those issues, you tend to see this big
divide between college grads and
non-grads. What's interesting is that
even on this subset of issues, college
grads and non-grads are not living in
two completely different universes. So,
we saw that during the Biden years, for
example,
college grads actually moved closer to
non-grads on immigration. They became
much more skeptical of immigration, much
more restrictionist, and their voting
preferences really started to come
closer to people without a degree. We
saw something similar with crime where
in the 2010s, people with degrees were
not very concerned about crime, while
people with degrees were very concerned.
But by the 2024 election, they had moved
much more closely toward where people
without a degree were. So, even on these
so-called cultural issues, these
non-economic issues, we've actually seen
some convergence that suggests that
these two groups of people don't have so
little in common that they can't even
talk to one another.
>> Just to raise something that we haven't
discussed yet, I want to ask about AI,
which is an economic force that we
haven't yet seen fully play out, but
which I could imagine would also have an
impact and perhaps is already having an
impact on college-educated people,
especially recent grads and their
political identity.
The AI revolution may ultimately hurt
college more than the working class. So,
how do you think about this massive
technological shift and its potential
effect on the political realignment that
you've studied?
>> Yeah, I really think it's going to add
to this sense that college grads are
workers just like people without a
degree who are at the mercy of
executives and big powerful companies. I
think one thing that we're seeing with
AI is that it's spreading that sense of
powerlessness to a whole variety of
white-collar workers that hadn't really
been affected by this before. So,
whether you're talking about lawyers or
people in banking, in finance, or
consulting, or marketing, or sales,
suddenly all these folks are now having
to contend with AI and with the leverage
that that gives their employers and with
the lack of leverage that they suddenly
have in their own jobs when they can see
that a machine can do their work almost
as well, if not better, than they can.
>> And what are the political consequences
of that?
>> I think it's a little hard to say what
the political consequences are going to
be over the next 5 or 10 years, but one
thing that I can say with certainty is
that I've really seen in my own
reporting how radicalizing the shift can
be. I report a lot on tech workers and
their relationship to their companies
and their bosses, and just over the past
few years, amid the rise of AI, I've
just seen this incredible anger kind of
ricocheting across the internet and in
channels where they typically
congregate. It used to be that these
folks really that their companies had
their best interest at heart. They
thought [snorts] that they had good
relationships with their bosses. They
wanted to be their bosses. And as these
big tech companies have laid people off
and have cited all the ways that AI is
changing their jobs and how many workers
they need, these folks, they're really
lashing out in ways that I've never
seen. And I think that's only going to
be exacerbated as we see these companies
worth hundreds of billions or even
trillions of dollars go public in a way
that's really accruing to just a small
portion of very affluent, very rich
owners and founders of these companies
and leaving behind tens of thousands of
people who've been laid off just in the
last year or two amid the rise of AI.
>> [music]
>> So, we don't know when exactly this will
have a political effect or how large
that political effect will be, but I
think we can say that this dividing line
between the 1% and the 99% is as stark
as it's ever been.
And I would guess that it's only going
to get starker going forward.
>> [music]
>> Well, Noam, thank you so much.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> [music]
>> Noam Scheiber's book is called Mutiny:
The Rise and Revolt of the
College-Educated Working Class.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
>> The US launched a new wave of air
strikes on Iran hours after President
Trump vowed to keep up military pressure
on Tehran because Iranian leaders were
taking, quote, too long to negotiate.
[music]
Earlier US strikes on Wednesday
destroyed what appears to be a drinking
water facility on Iran's southern coast
near the Strait of Hormuz, according to
an analysis by the [music] New York
Times.
A local official said that water was cut
off to more than 20,000 people
>> [music]
>> living in a town and villages nearby.
Temperatures in the area have reached
above 100° F
this week.
>> [music]
>> It's unclear if the US intentionally
struck the water facility.
Deliberately targeting civilian
infrastructure could constitute a war
crime
>> [music]
>> under international law.
Today's episode was [music] produced by
Stella Tan, Ricky Newetsky, and Olivia
Nat. It was edited by Lisa Chow, [music]
fact-checked by Will Peischel, and
contains music by Mary Ann Lozano, Dan
Powell, [music]
Diane Wong, Rowan Nimisto, and Alicia
BAE Tube.
Our theme music [music] is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood. Special thanks to Joe [music]
Lensky, the Roper Center for Public
Opinion Research, Jon Della Volpe, and
Mark [music] Kantrowitz.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.